\chapter{Conclusion and Future Work}
\label{chapter:conclusion}

In this chapter we conclude the thesis and suggest potential future work.

\section{Conclusion}

The goal of this thesis was to investigate different ways to improve the
performance of Web services in networks characterized by unreliable connects,
high error rates and low data rate. Web services enable interoperability between
systems, but adapting Web services meant for civil use into limited networks may
not be feasible due to the network limitations. To adapt standard Web services
into DIL networks without requiring incorporating proprietary solutions, based
on previous research we introduced the usage of proxies. The proxy applies
optimization techniques in order to facilitate the usage and increase of
performance for Web services in DIL. As a part of the thesis we therefore
specified a set of requirements for the proxy and implemented it using the
Apache Camel framework.

The premises of the thesis were that the proxy should:

\begin{enumerate}
    \item Support HTTP RESTful and W3C Web services.
    \item Work in DIL networks.
    \item Be interoperable with standards-based COTS solutions.
    \item Work with security mechanisms.
\end{enumerate}

In our evaluation we tested whether our proxy solution fulfilled these premises
and the more detailed requirements we specified in
\cref{section:requirements-summary}. Through the function testing we were able
to prove that the proxy worked with a test set of Web service applications. The
Web services successfully forwarded the requests through a deployed proxy pair,
without requiring modifications except configuring the usage of proxies. This
fulfilled premises one and three, as well as requirement 1 and 2.

Furthermore, we tested how the proxies facilitated the usage of Web services in
DIL networks. We verified that the proxy was able to overcome the disconnect
aspect of DIL by implementing a redelivery mechanism. This fulfilled requirement
5 and the disconnect aspect of premise 2. Requirement 4 regarding frequent
network disruptions was not explicitly tested, but should be fulfilled by design
since the proxy employs reliable protocols and an application layer redelivery
mechanism.

Requirement 3 was fulfilled by implementing GZIP compression on messages between
proxies. Optimization proved to yield a significant performance increase with
regards the RTT time perceived by Web service clients.

We also validated that the proxy could overcome the limited aspect of DIL, as
the test cases was successful in all emulated DIL networks. This fulfilled
premises 2 and requirement 6.F urthermore, we supported a set of transport
protocols as the means of transporting data between proxies and with that
fulfilled requirement 8. We saw how different transport protocol affected the
performance of Web services. In most of the different types of DIL environments,
using HTTP/TCP as the inter-proxy protocol was proved as the best transport.
However, we saw that in cases where the message payload was low and in networks
with low data rates, using a CoAP proxy was the best option. We also discovered
how the Californium implementation of CoAP with default configuration caused a
sub-optimal utilization. Tuning the block-size configuration could improve the
CoAP's proxy performance also for larger payloads.

Next, we proved that the proxy works with security mechanisms through a
proof-of-concept test using secure Web services.

Finally, the proxy implements a configuration setup that allows the user to
specify different properties of the proxy. A user of the proxy can easily
configure properties of the redelivery mechanism and change the transport
protocol used between proxies. The proxy has been designed to be easily
extendable to include other protocols and optimization techniques. The Apache
Camel framework used in the implementation facilitates this by supporting a
component based transport mechanism, as well as easily allowing customization of
the payload. This satisfies requirement 7, 9 and 10.


All in all, the goal of the thesis was reached. We developed a prototype proxy
and were able improve the performance of Web services in DIL environments.
Further possible investigates in this area and improvements to the proxy are
discussed in the next section.


\section{Future Work}
IPSEC.

\subsection{Andre protokoller}
SCTP, OPC-UA

\subsection{Improvements of Proxy}

Runtime valg av optimalisering.


Not necessary to use proxy message here, since we can simply forward the HTTP request.


\subsection{Known bugs}

HTTP Request headers are also included in the HTTP response.

\subsubsection{HTTP}
